Radiation is defined as a radiation of energy that ionizies its surroundings. This kind of 
radiation can be damaging because due to the nature of ionizing radiation. This kind of 
radiaiton impacts molecules and breaks them down, leading to a degredation of the material 
as it is exposed to the radiation. This problem is especially relavent to nuclear reactors, 
where large amounts of ionizing radiation is created in the proccess of generating power.

It's been known for some time that radiation impacts the structural integrity of concrete. 
However, until now the details of this were unknown. Researchers, including those from the 
University of Tokyo, can finally demonstrate what properties of concrete affect its 
structural characteristics under different neutron radiation loads. Their findings raise 
some concerns whilst reducing others; for example, quartz crystals in concrete can heal 
themselves, potentially allowing some reactors to run for longer than initially thought 
possible.

Some high-profile incidents involving nuclear power stations naturally raise fear in people.
But many believe nuclear power to be one of the cornerstones for achieving a 
carbon-neutral world. This places an emphasis on finding ways to improve safety, 
reliability, cost-effectiveness and other things, to reduce fears and increase 
receptiveness to this technology. One aspect of nuclear power stations that relates to 
safety and also longevity lies in the materials used in their construction; in particular, 
the concrete used throughout the buildings. It's known to be a very robust material and has
been studied for a long time to better understand its material characteristics. But only 
now have researchers been able to explore in detail the way that neutron radiation from 
nuclear reactors can impact concrete's longevity.

Some simple solutions have been thrown around such as impregnating the concrete with lead to 
make it more radiation resistant. Others included shielding the concrete directly with steel
or lead lined shields. However, these solutions tend to be costly, so scientists have devised
new solutions.

Quartz crystals have the ability to "heal" themselves from radiation damage, so sand, which
is close to quartz, is used in new concrete blends in plentiful amounts to aid in the
resistance of radation damage. Other solutions have been even more simple such as simply just
making the concrete more denser which means there is more material for the radiation to
damage before the structural integrity of the conrete is altered significantly. This also
has the bonus of acting as a radiation shield for personel working at the reactor.

As developments in nuclear standards continue, we can expect to see safety improvements
in all future nuclear power stations, and see them last longer.
