Nickel is a vital resource for electric vehicle batteries. But why nickel? Many battery 
types with different battery chemistries exist, including Alkaline, Lead Acid, Lithium Ion,
Lithium Polymer, and Nickel Metal Hydride. The latter battery chemistry type is the most
commonly used type for electric vehicles due to their relativly high energy density and
saftey. Lithium based batteries are more energy dense, however do not boast the same safety
specifications as Nickel Metal Hydride (NiMH).

Unfortunatley, these Nickel is a dwindling resource on our planet, only becoming more rarer
the more we use the metal to manufacture NiMH batteries, on the upside, it is still more
abundant than Lithium and easier to obtain than widely used cobalt. Nickel is also less
stable than other materials with respect to cycle life, thermal stability, and safety
compared to simpler battery chemistries such as lead acid.

Researchers from The University of Texas at Austin and Argonne National Laboratory aim to 
change that with a new study that dives deep into nickel-based cathodes, one of the two 
electrodes that facilitate energy storage in batteries.
"High-nickel cathodes have the potential to revolutionize the EV market by providing longer
driving ranges," said Arumugam Manthiram, a professor at the Walker Department of 
Mechanical Engineering and Texas Materials Institute and one of the leaders of the study 
published in Nature Energy.
"Our study provides a comprehensive analysis of their thermal stability, which is crucial 
for developing safer batteries." ​
The research team conducted more than 500 measurements on 15 high-nickel cathode materials.

They discovered that each cathode has a critical state of charge that defines its safe 
operating limit. The strength of metal-oxygen bonds and surface reactivity influence this 
crucial state.

Once the material exceeds this limit, instability creeps in. That can trigger the 
catastrophic condition of thermal runaway, when increased temperature releases energy that 
further heats the battery, substantially increasing the risk of failure and/or fires. 
As part of this project, the researchers developed a thermal stability index, quantifying 
how the material reacts during thermal runaway.

​Factors influencing cathode thermal stability include cathode composition, surface 
chemistry, nickel content, and crystal size.

This research has far-reaching implications, offering a path to safer, more efficient 
batteries that can support the growing demand for electric vehicles. As the world moves 
towards cleaner energy solutions, these advancements are crucial for making EVs more viable
and attractive for consumers.

"Our work provides a roadmap for the industry to follow, ensuring that the high energy 
density of these cathodes does not come at the cost of safety," said Zehao Cui, a research 
associate in Manthiram's group.

The researchers will continue their work on thermal stability and cathodes.

Up next, they will bring electrolytes into the equation.

Electrolytes are the chemical components, often liquid-based, that shuttle the 
charge-carrying ions back and forth. They enable the battery's charge and discharge 
functionality, and ensuring reliable interactions between electrolytes and cathodes is 
critical to improving battery safety.
