TITLE: Humans have altered the Earth so much that migratory animals are facing extinction
Many animals are being hunted to extinction or being affected by climate change.
Female leatherback turtles are among the world’s most intrepid creatures, making journeys as far as 10,000 miles after nesting to find food in far-away seas. They’ve been known to set off from tropical Southeast Asia up to the cold waters of Alaska, where jellyfish are common.
But travelling such a long way means encountering threats that can be fatal fishing nets intended for other species, poachers, pollution and waters warmed by the climate crisis, which force the turtles to travel even further to find their prey.
These turtles are just one of hundreds of migratory species those that make remarkable journeys each year across land, rivers and oceans that are facing extinction because of human interference, according to a landmark UN agency report published Monday.
Of the 1,189 creatures listed by the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, or CMS, more than one in five are threatened.
They include species from all sorts of animal groups whales, sharks, elephants, wild cats, raptors, birds and insects, among others.
Some 44% of those species listed are undergoing population declines, the report said. Most alarming is the state of the world’s migratory fish nearly all, 97%, of those listed are threatened with extinction.
The report is the first inventory to assess the status of migratory species and how they are trying to survive in a world dramatically changed by humans. It found the two biggest threats were overexploitation and loss of habitat because of human activity, such as clearing land for farming, roads and infrastructure. Those activities also fragment migratory species’ pathways, sometimes making it impossible for them to complete their journeys.
Around 58% of the monitored locations recognized as important for migratory species are facing what the CMS says are unsustainable levels of pressure from humans.
Climate change and pollution are also major threats. Warmer temperatures not only force some species to travel farther, but can also lead animals to move at different times of year. That can mean missing out on prey or a mate for breeding.
One particularly stark example is the narwhal. These mythical looking sea creatures, famous for their spiralled tusks, spend summers in mostly ice free coastal areas before migrating south into deeper Arctic waters.
However, as the oceans warm and annual sea ice expansion happens later and later, scientists have found some narwhals are delaying their journey, risking becoming trapped in sea ice with no openings to breathe through if the ice flash freezes in the fall.
