On March 7th 2025 Sea turtles are responding to climate change by nesting earlier in the year in a move to compensate for rising temperatures, researchers monitoring the breeding habits of green and loggerhead turtles in Cyprus have discovered.
Observing the ‘natal philopatry’ common in sea turtles a kind of homint system which sees them return to nest in the area where they themselves hatched a research team from the University of Exeter witnessed a changing behaviour in nesting over the last three years.
The temperature plays a crucial role in the sea turtles nesting and hatching process. In these species, temperature determines the biological sex of offspring, with more females born when it’s warmer and affecting the hatching success rate when it gets too hot.
And for each 1 celcius increase in sea temperature sea turtles lay eggs 6 days earlier.
To understand how turtles are adapting, conservation ecologist Annette Broderick and colleagues analyzed three decades of nesting data from around 600 tagged sea turtles on the beaches of Northern Cyprus. The data included the number of successful hatchlings in each nest and temperatures during incubation. The team found that individual females nested earlier as temperatures rose, laying eggs just over six days earlier.
While previous research has shown the nesting activity of whole turtle populations moving earlier, the new study confirms that individual turtles are actively adjusting their behavior in response to climate change. “This may seem like a foregone conclusion. It really isn’t,” says study coauthor Mollie Rickwood, a marine biologist at Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand. That’s because population-wide shifts in nesting behavior could be happening for multiple reasons.
“For example,” Broderick says, “each female may be consistent in the time she nests each year, but new recruits to the population may lay earlier than older nesters, therefore making the average earlier.” By looking at individual animals, the researchers showed that all females are adjusting their timing.
Along with temperatures, breeding experience and number of clutches laid in a year equally influenced the timing of nesting. Other studies suggest that the earlier egg laying seen now in some turtle species seems to be enough to offset the effects of warming temperatures on the eggs.
