Tunnel diodes are electrical components often used in RF (radio frequency) applications where designs
requiring negative resistance is needed. The most common application for these diodes are in oscillators,
detectors, and amplifiers, and switching circuits where the negatove resistance property of tunnel diodes
are useful.

Tunnel diodes operate on the principle of Quantum Mechanical Tunneling, where electrons pass through a 
potential energy barrier. This gives the diode the unique property of negative resistance, where the 
more voltage you apply, the less current flows. It would seem it follows a negative ohms law, where
I = R/V.

What makes tunnel diodes special is their extremely low junction capacitance, making them useful in 
applications where high frequencies are used. Microwave oscillators and radar applications are sectors
where the unique nature of the tunnel diode come into play.

The tunnel diode, however, is an old invention, being invented in 1957 by Leo Esaki and Yuriko Kurose at 
Tokyo Tsushin Kogyo, now known as Sony. This invention was used in specialized places in the late 20th 
century, however, as other semiconductor technologies improved, subsitutes for tunnel diodes also increased.

Eventually, silicon semiconductor technology reached a level enough to make tunnel diodes obsolete in most
of the sectors it once used to dominate. However, a lasting impact tunnel diodes left was the introduction of
practical quantum mechanics for electronics, which we can now see developed as quantum computers.

The development of quantum computers actually plays a role in the future of tunnel diodes, despite their 
obsolescence in most sectors. Silicon based tunnel diodes are a fairly new development, and is being put to
the test. The most intriguing thing about quantum tunneling in electronic components is that quantum tunneing
is instant, faster than light, which is why tunnel diodes also performed so well in high speed circuits.

The integration of tunnel diodes into standard semiconductor circuits could increase the speed and performance
of them, reaching boundaries beyond what standard silicon semiconductors can achieve.
