Germany, the economic powerhouse in europe, has decomissioned its last three nuclear power plants a couple years ago.
Nuclear power is often touted as the future of clean energy for the world due to the power they have to generate.
However, people remain skeptical of the benefits of nuclear power, often swayed by the risks that nuclear power
presents. A notable nuclear disaster that comes to the mind of many europeans is the Chernobyl nuclear accident in the
1980s, which nearly made europe a nuclear wasteland. 

A 4000MW capable plant with four nuclear reactors exploded, spraying dangerously radioactive fallout into the atmosphere.
Luckily only one of the four reactors has actually has a problem, yet this was enough to significantly increase radiation
levels across europe. With the memories of Chernyobl still fresh in the mind of many european inhabitants, fear for another
disaster is wide spread.

However, not all oppositon to nuclear power is present because of the dangers, but also because of cost. It is no 
secret that building a nuclear power plant is expensive. Many precautions must be taken when building a nuclear
reactor, which add costs to the construction of the plant. The nuclear fuel itself is also a cost point, being more
expensive than other fuel sources. Not only that, the world heavily relies on countries such as Kazakstan to supply nuclear
due to their plentiful sources, but the exraction of uranium itself is also problematic. Spent nuclear fuel is also a concern
to many citizens, as spent fuel is not very easily disposed of and can pose hazards to the enviroment.

Unfortunatly due to current global circumstances such as the war between Ukraine and Russia, Kazakstan is viewed as a
liability in the eyes of Germans due to their close relations with Russia. This invokes supply chain issues for
much of europe.

This does not mean nuclear power is impossible or even unfeasible. France, Germany's neighbor is an excellent example for
a leading power in nuclear power. France's energy supply is fuffiled about 70% by its own domestic nuclear power plants, 
which is a huge amount. Due to France's heavy investment into nuclear power, the French have developed methods for managing
many problems accorciated with nuclear power. First of all, the operational safety of French reactors have a pretty good
history, only having a couple in its early years, and none in our modern time. Nuclear fuel disposal issues have also been
midigated with the development of the French program for recycling nuclear fuel so that it can once again be used again.
These developments have paved a way for a potentially more nuclear future.

This doesn't mean that all nuclear issues are solved though. France has experienced several challenges for nuclear power.
In 2022, France imported a significant amount of energy from Germany to compensate for its issues with said reactors. Many
reactors were unable to operate due to issues with the cooling systems these reactors employ. High temperatures in the
atmosphere made it difficult for the cooling towers to work efficiently, leading to the inability for these nuclear plants to
operate.

This raises concerns for nuclear energy as global warming will only increase temperatures further, making it difficult for
reactors to continue operate at peak efficiency. However, Germany does consistently import significant amounts of energy from
France, being sourced from their Nuclear power plants.

All in all, Germany's unwillingness to use nuclear power comes from a mixture of fear of nucelar concequences and costs
risk basis.
